---
title:  "Teoria Organizacional: Uma Perspectiva Libertária"
date:   2016-04-07
author:
  - Kevin Carson
categories:
  - Artigo
tags:
  - libertarianismo
  - organização
  - mutualismo
---
```
Traduzido por: Vinicius Yaunner
Revisado por: Cypherpunks Brasil
```

# Prefácio

Este livro teve origem em uma passagem (a seção *“Fiscal and Input Crises”* do Capítulo Oito) de meu último livro, *Studies in Mutualist Political Economy*. Se você ler essa passagem (está disponível online em [Mutualist.Org](Mutualist.Org)), você terá uma ideia da perspectiva que me levou a escrever este livro. Os pensamentos radicais sobre patologias organizacionais nessa passagem, tanto meus quanto os dos escritores que citei, combinavam com minhas experiências de irracionalidade burocrática e *Bossismo de Cabelos Pontudos* em uma vida como trabalhador e consumidor.

o get the rest of the questions on my perspective out of the way, I should mention that the wording of the subtitle (“A Libertarian Perspective”) reflects a long process of indecision  and  changes,  and  is  something  I  still  find  unsatisfactory.  I  vacillated  between  the adjectives  “mutualist,”  “anarchist,”  “individualist  anarchist,”  and  “left-libertarian,”  not really satisfied with any of them because of their likely tendency to pigeonhole my work or scare away my target audience. I finally ended up (with some misgivings) with plain old “Libertarian.” It’s a term of considerable contention between the classical liberal and libertarian socialist camps. I don’t mean the choice of term in a sense that would exclude either side. In fact, as an individualist in the tradition of Tucker and the rest of the Boston anarchists,  I  embrace  both  the  free  market  libertarian  and  libertarian  socialist  camps.  I  chose “libertarian”  precisely  it  was  large  and  contained  multitudes:  it  alone  seemed  sufficiently broad to encompass the readership I had in mind.

I  write  from  the  perspective  of  individualist  anarchism,  as  set  forth  by  William  B. Greene and Benjamin Tucker among others, and as I attempted to update it for the twenty-first century in my last book. Here’s how I described it in the Preface to that book:

>In the mid-nineteenth century, a vibrant native American school of anarchism, known as individualist anarchism, existed alongside the other varieties. Like most other contemporary socialist thought, it was based on a radical interpretation of Ricardian economics. The classical individualist anarchism of Josiah Warren, Benjamin Tucker and Lysander Spooner was both a socialist movement and a subcurrent of classical liberalism. It agreed with the rest of the socialist movement that labor was the source of exchange-value, and... entitled  to  its  full  product.  Unlike  the  rest  of  the  socialist  movement,  the  individualist  anarchists  believed  that  the  natural  wage  of  labor  in  a  free  market  was  its product,  and  that economic exploitation could only take place when capitalists and landlords harnessed the power of the state in their interests. Thus, individualist anarchism was an alternative both to  the  increasing  statism  of  the  mainstream  socialist  movement,  and  to  a  classical  liberal movement that was moving toward a mere apologetic for the power of big business.[1]

I belong to the general current of the Left so beautifully described by the editors of Radical Technology (“the  ‘recessive  Left’  of  anarchists,  utopians  and  visionaries,  which  tends only  to  manifest  itself  when  dominant  genes  like  Lenin  or  Harold Wilson  are  off  doing something else”). As such, I tend to agree with the Greens and other left-wing decentralists on the evils to which they object in current society and on their general view of a good society,  while  I  agree  with  free  market  libertarians  on  their  analysis  of  the  cause  of  such evils and how to get from here to there. In short: green ends with libertarian means.

The  central  question  of  Part  One  is  that  of  Ronald  Coase:  If  markets  are  more  efficient  than  hierarchy  and  planning,  why  are  the  latter  so  prevalent? Why  do  we  find  the phenomenon  that  Coase  remarked  on—islands  of  corporate  central  planning  in  an  economy  supposedly  governed  by  the  market?  Coase’s  answer  was  that  firm  boundaries—the boundaries  between  market  and  hierarchy—are  set  at  the  point  at  which  the  transaction costs of market contracting surpass than those of administration and planning. The subject of Part One is the extent to which the state artificially shifts these boundaries upward, so that the size of the dominant organization is far larger than warranted by genuine considerations of efficiency. 

Part Two  (consisting  of  a  single  chapter,  Four)  considers  the  pathological  effects  of large size, centralization and hierarchy, on a systemic level, under the hegemony of the corporation  and  the  centralized  state. That  is,  it  considers  the  effect  of  the  predominance  of the  large,  hierarchical  organization,  and  of  the  professionalized  and  bureaucratic  culture  it spawns, on the character of society as a whole.

Part Three examines the effects of large size and hierarchy within the large organization. Chapters Five and Six are brief surveys of the literature on information and incentive problems within the large organization, both by conventional organization theorists and by radical thinkers like Robert Anton Wilson and Paul Goodman. Chapter Seven applies the Austrian critique of central planning to the corporation. Chapter Eight is a broad-ranging examination  of  the  irrationality  and  authoritarianism  of  the  large  organization,  and  of  the general pathologies of managerialism: in particular, it is a critique of the currently prevailing MBA model of downsizing human capital, stripping assets, and gutting long-term productive capabilities in order to game management bonuses and stock options. Chapter Nine is a study of the internal crisis of governability of the large corporation, and—based on conventional literature on incomplete contracting—applies an asymmetric warfare model to labor relations  within  the  corporation. And  Chapter Ten  examines  the  broad  range  of  management theory and reform gimmicks, which I argue either serve as a mere legitimizing ideology of lip-service, or amount to an attempt to incorporate libertarian and decentralist elements into the old framework of corporate hierarchy rather than making them the building blocks of a fundamentally new form of society.

Finally,  Part  Four—of  which  I  am  especially  proud—surveys  the  range  of  technical and  organizational  alternatives  that  might  prevail  in  a  decentralist,  cooperative,  genuinely free market economy. Chapters Eleven and Twelve discuss the twin structural principles of a  genuinely  libertarian  society:  the  abolition  of  privilege  and  its  replacement  by  a  genuinely free market governed by the unfettered operation of the cost principle. Chapter Thirteen discusses the most feasible process for dismantling the state and moving toward such a society,  summed  up  by  the  Wobbly  slogan  “Building  the  structure  of  the  new  society within the shell of the old.” Chapter Fourteen examines the technological building blocks of a decentralized economy (especially small-scale general-purpose production machinery, desktop  production  machinery,  and  community-supported  agriculture)  based  on  smallscale production for local markets. Chapters Fifteen and Sixteen, finally, examine the organizational  building  blocks  of  production  (cooperatives,  peer  production,  and  the  informal and household economies) and distribution. 

This book, for better or worse, is an example of peer production. The chapters have all appeared as rough drafts online, and much of the material within them appeared before that as posts on my blog (Mutualist Blog: Free Market Anti-Capitalism). The final form of this book reflects  the  enormous  amount  of  fruitful  discussion  in  the  comments  at  my  blog,  and  the helpful questions and criticisms raised by my readers, and the insights I have gained from dialogue  with  other  organization  theory  bloggers  and  writers.  I’ve  received  invaluable  help  in identifying typos and other errors from readers (particularly Matthieu Gues) who have compiled painstaking errata lists from reading the online drafts. Both the pdf I submitted to the publisher and the beautiful cover design are the work of Gary Chartier. So in many ways this is a collaborative product, and I owe my readers a debt of gratitude.

I welcome questions and criticisms. I can be reached by email at 
<free.market.anticapitalist@gmail.com>

[1] Kevin  A.  Carson,  *Studies  in  Mutualist  Political  Economy*.  Self-published  via  Blitzprint  (Fayetteville, Ark., 2004), p. 9.