---
title:  'Debate Sobre Agorismo'
date:   2022-04-20
categories:
  - Artigo
tags:
  - Agorismo
author:
  - Nathan Goodman
  - C4SS
  - Logan Marie Glitterbomb
  - Derrick Broze
description: 'Essa template é apenas um exemplo para te ajudar a passar textos para esse padrão. Obviamente esse documento não é para ser traduzido, apenas para servir como exemplo'
---

```
Traduzido por: pipipi popopo
Revisado por: peixe lua
```
[```ver lista de contribuidores```](/about/#contribuidores)

# Debate Sobre Agorismo

**Nota:** Foi uma discussão que teve dentro da [C4SS](https://c4ss.org/) a respeito de estratégias dentro do anarquismo com foco maior no [agorismo.](https://cypherpunks.com.br/tags/agorismo/)

## Beware Panaceas: Promises and Pitfalls of Agorism, Illegalism, and Syndicalism
### Nathan Goodman

I am generally favorable to agorism, direct action, and other anarchist strategies that emphasize building the new world in the shell of the old. However, I recognize that there are no panaceas. All strategies have costs and benefits, and strategies for social change may have serious pitfalls and unintended consequences. This essay employs some basic concepts from economics in order to explore potential pitfalls of direct action strategies.

**Bootleggers and Baptists: Black market entrepreneurs as beneficiaries of state action**

One common phenomenon in regulatory policy is “bootleggers and Baptists.” First discussed in a [paper](https://techliberation.com/wp-content/uploads/2010/12/v7n3-3.pdf) by regulatory economist Bruce Yandle, the phrase refers to how seemingly opposed constituencies often support the same regulations. Sunday closing laws, which shut down bars and liquor stores on Sundays, received support from Baptists on moral grounds, but also from bootleggers who would see their competitors shut down on Sundays.

In an agorist framework, bootleggers are understood as part of the black market, the counter-economy. Bootleggers provide goods that people have a natural right to purchase. They are entrepreneurs who route around the state to provide goods and services that have been unjustly criminalized. And yet because state intervention reduces the competition they face, these counter-economic entrepreneurs have incentives to support state intervention.

Similarly, drug prohibition increases the profits reaped by drug cartels. Prohibition deters competitors from entering the drug market. This raises the prices of drugs. However, addiction makes demand for drugs inelastic. That is, users are not particularly responsive to price. So an increase in price increases profits. As Milton Friedman once [said](https://www.druglibrary.org/schaffer/misc/friedm1.htm) “if you look at the drug war from a purely economic point of view, the role of the government is to protect the drug cartel.”

David Skarbek’s recent work on prison gangs expands this point. Skarbek documents how prison gangs have risen to power as a result of mass incarceration. When prison populations are small, reputation can provide the right incentives to govern black markets. Someone who engages in dishonest behavior in a drug transaction could have their reputation ruined and face ostracism. Once prison populations are larger, however, people cannot know the reputation of their fellows. Governance must be provided by other means, and so prison gangs rise to power.

While these governance institutions lack the state’s monopoly jurisdiction and provide governance in a way that enables black market transactions, they can be just as authoritarian and violent as states. Skarbek documents how prison gangs collect taxes from gangs outside the prison by threatening their members with violence inside prisons if the outside gang fails to pay taxes. These gangs also enforce their rules through brutal violence. Citing a survey of prison officials where high scores indicate greater frequency of activity, [Skarbek](https://kclpure.kcl.ac.uk/portal/files/13228776/Skarbek2012.pdf) explains “prison gangs engage in predatory actions often, including intimidation (148 points, the highest score), assault (134), abuse of weak inmates (133), extortion (131), theft (117), strong arm robbery (99), robbery (89), rape (83), murder (79), arson (61), and slavery (52).” So prison gangs route around the state in order to facilitate and govern black markets. But they also engage in predatory violence, and they benefit from state policies. How should an agorist think about these institutions? Surely we should not valorize them as purely the agents of the counter-economic social change we want to see in the world.

The economic way of thinking provides us with good reasons to anticipate that agorist approaches to social change will be superior to strategies that emphasize reforms implemented through the political process. Politics is insulated from the entrepreneurial market process, and therefore lacks feedback mechanisms to ensure that value is created rather than destroyed. By working through the market process, agorist entrepreneurs have incentives to create value, access the dispersed knowledge that is coordinated through the price mechanism, and adapt their actions when they become destructive rather than productive. However, black markets are distorted by the state in ways that often benefit particular participants in those black markets. These actors may become predatory and embrace unproductive entrepreneurship that undermines liberty rather than advancing it.

**Syndicalism, illegalism, and other counter-economic allies**

My colleagues and comrades Logan Glitterbomb and Nick Ford have proposed alliances with illegalists and syndicalists as potential ways for agorists to increase their counter-economic impact. Illegalists engage in theft as a means of individual empowerment, insurrectionary defiance of the state, and redistribution of wealth away from the ruling class. Syndicalists engage in alt-labor tactics and wildcat unionism to advance the interests of workers in their organization. Their goal is often to seize the means of production and establish firms managed democratically by workers.

Illegalists and syndicalists are in some sense natural allies for agorists, as all three philosophies emphasize anti-authoritarian direct action that defies the state’s repressive legal regimes. However, I have some qualms about both syndicalist and illegalist tactics, and I think there are real pitfalls for use to be aware of.

Alt-labor organizations often avoid the worst pitfalls of union organization. Establishment unions, such as the [AFL-CIO,](https://aflcio.org/Blog/Economy/Bill-Targets-Rogue-Websites-that-Kill-Jobs-Steal-Wages) have often established crony relationships with the state. The AFL-CIO, for example, supported expanding intellectual property protectionism and censoring the internet through such laws as SOPA and PIPA, because this law would benefit their members in the entertainment industry. These establishment unions have also historically excluded immigrants, people of color, and women. The syndicalist Industrial Workers of the World was largely formed in order to provide a more inclusive union that avoided these exclusionary policies. Moreover, while the AFL-CIO embraces the federal government’s National Labor Relations Board, alt-labor organizations such as the [Coalition of Immokalee Workers](https://reason.com/2014/01/28/free-market-labor-wins-wage-boost-victor/) have gained their victories by refusing to work through these bureaucratic channels.

However, even unions that have syndicalist or alt-labor tendencies can engage in coercive tactics that undermine libertarian principles. For example, the Industrial Workers of the World, a favorite of anarchists and left-libertarians, [successfully filed an action against non-profit Sisters’ Camelot at the National Labor Relations Board.](https://www.iww.org/content/nlrb-rules-union-canvasser-fired-illegally-sisters%E2%80%99-camelot-orders-back-pay-reinstatement/) Rather than acting in a counter-economic manner, the IWW here chose to go to the federal government in order to punish a private organization for their hiring and firing decisions.

Moreover, illegalist and syndicalist tactics may undermine property rights even when they do not involve appealing to the state. This is fairly obvious for illegalist tactics, which explicitly valorize theft as a form of direct action. Syndicalism may also involve the coercive transfer of property, particularly when it entails seizing factories from their owners. There are worthwhile questions to ask about the legitimacy of existing property claims given historical injustices such as the enclosures and other state actions that have privileged capitalists and impoverished workers. However, action that serves to transfer property from one person (or group of persons) to another person or group without the consent of the initial owner is zero or negative sum action. Given that we have limited time, labor, resources, and entrepreneurial alertness, there is a real opportunity cost to devoting our efforts to securing transfers rather than production and mutually beneficial exchange.

Economist [William Baumol](https://ibs.colorado.edu/alston/econ4504/readings/Baumol%201990.pdf) draws an important distinction between productive and unproductive entrepreneurship. A great deal of unproductive entrepreneurship is mediated through the political. Rent-seeking, lobbying, securing monopoly privileges, and war-profiteering are all good examples. But unproductive entrepreneurship can also occur outside the state apparatus, through theft and plunder. Regardless of whether the state is involved, this can create a cycle, where each act of unproductive entrepreneurship creates new niches for unproductive entrepreneurial profits. Illegalists who are engaged in theft, for example, may make theft easier for others or develop networks that help others build skill sets conducive to theft. This reduces total wealth, trust, and social cooperation.

Agorism is desirable in large part because it uses productive entrepreneurship to enlarge the productive sector of the economy and starve the unproductive state sector. Agorist counter-economic action shifts incentive towards productive entrepreneurship and away from unproductive entrepreneurship. Syndicalist direct action may do this under some circumstances, particularly when it employs the innovative free-market model used by the Coalition of Immokalee Workers. But when syndicalist and illegalist direct action involves coercive transfer as a key tactic, it fuels an [unproductive entrepreneurial process](https://www.ccoyne.com/Non-Productive_Ent_Process-RAE.pdf) that can contribute to economic stagnation.

These points can provide reasons to avoid seeking transfers and coercive redistribution even when historical injustice makes the legitimacy of property titles highly dubious. It may be that the prevailing economic distribution is profoundly unjust, but that the best way to rectify this is to let the free market eat the rich and to outcompete the privileged elites that currently hold unjust wealth. Attempting to rectify it coercively can encourage unproductive entrepreneurship and weaken the social norms of individual liberty and mutually beneficial social cooperation that we seek to foster as market anarchists. As Peter Boettke and Christopher Coyne argue in their paper [The Political Economy of Forgiveness,](https://www.usc.edu/schools/college/crcc/private/ierc/Political_Economy.pdf) embracing reconciliation rather than vengeance after atrocities is often the best way to begin cultivating the norms of peaceful social cooperation that are conducive to free and flourishing societies.

Agorism, and to some extent syndicalism and illegalism, have significant advantages over the top-down pursuit of public policy. These grassroots tactics allow people with local knowledge to act in ways that advance their own well-being and liberation, rather than asking bureaucrats or politicians who lack this knowledge to implement reforms from the top down. Direct action tactics operate within a polycentric context that allow them to seek goals that may seem utopian, while at the same time avoiding the fatal conceits of attempting to impose panaceas on diverse environments where they may not fit. However, these strategies face real pitfalls, downsides, and trade offs that we should take seriously. I hope that this essay can start an honest conversation among anarchists about these potential pitfalls, and enables anarchists to start building solutions to them.

## Examining Agoric Intent and Agora-Syndicalist Practices: A Response to Nathan Goodman
### C4SS

**I: Does Agorism Require Intent?**

Nathan Goodman has recently published a great piece on some of the drawbacks and potentials  of agorism, direct action and trying to synthesize agorism with illegalism or syndicalism. In this piece I’ll address a few of his general arguments and then move to address his specific points about agora-syndicalism. In addition I shall make some critical remarks of my own towards agorism in line with the helpful comments I feel Goodman has made.

Goodman starts off with an interesting example, “In an agorist framework, bootleggers are understood as part of the black market, the counter-economy. Bootleggers provide goods that people have a natural right to purchase. They are entrepreneurs who route around the state to provide goods and services that have been unjustly criminalized. And yet because state intervention reduces the competition they face, these counter-economic entrepreneurs have incentives to support state intervention.”

While Goodman is correct that from an agorist framework they would be considered a part of the black market, being a part of the black market and the *counter-economy* are not always the same thing. From my perspective the black market is simply a type of market whereby illegal goods are bought and sold. The *counter-economy* on the other hand is, I’d argue, a *certain type* of black market whereby the people involved are *intentionally* trying to mitigate the state’s efforts and do it for *radical* purposes.

This opens up a larger discussion with some of my problems with agorism, one of which being the matter of ideology and intent. Agorists like to point to the Soviet Union as a great example of a flourishing black market but much of the “counter-economy” had nothing at all to do with undermining state authority in any intentional or ideological way. The black market was a way to survive and once state-capitalist markets started replacing it as the Soviet Union dissolved more and more, Russian folks turned away from the black markets.

What are agorists to make of this?

For one thing I think they should temper their historical examples with more historical context but with that in mind it’s still true that black markets are a flexible and powerful tool for revolutionary struggle through peaceful means. But at the same time they are a strategy that can be co-opted like anything else. If we have folks who are just bootleggers to make money or people who are doing things only to survive then the agorist revolution is unlikely to happen.

On the other hand the whole point of agorism is to have *politically conscious* individuals using black markets for counter-economic goals. Ironically, the libertarian community writ large seems to have forgotten this and sometimes appears more focused on who is making the most untaxed money then who is providing the most useful services for undermining the state.

One final point on the bootleggers is that we can see them in multi-faceted ways. In Thaddeus Russell’s book *A Renegade History of the United States* he points out the long history of mafia members providing gay bars for queer folks. Obviously members of the mafia were providing a valuable community service in defiance of the state but they’re also not particularly good people.

In this case an agorist would do well to try to *compartmentalize* in both political and moral ways with realizing that one of the great (and sometimes bad) things about markets is that people don’t necessarily have to be *obviously good* to do *obviously good* things for people.

Goodman makes a second point that I found somewhat puzzling, “So prison gangs route around the state in order to facilitate and govern black markets. But they also engage in predatory violence, and they benefit from state policies. How should an agorist think about these institutions? Surely we should not valorize them as purely the agents of the counter-economic social change we want to see in the world.”

In Samuel Edward Konkin III’s work he made the distinction between black markets and red markets and he explains this in his pamphlet *Counter-Economics,* “The Counter-Economy is the sum of all non-aggressive Human Action which is forbidden by the State. Counter-economics is the study of the Counter-Economy and its practices. The Counter-Economy includes the free market, the Black Market, the “underground economy,” all acts of civil and social disobedience, all acts of forbidden association (sexual, racial, cross-religious), and anything else the State, at any place or time, chooses to prohibit, control, regulate, tax, or tariff. The Counter-Economy excludes all State-approved action (the “White Market”) and the Red Market (violence and theft not approved by the State)”

Konkin is obviously drawing from Mises here and uses a broader definition of “counter-economy” than I am. Nevertheless, I think it’s clear that we can easily separate out the violent and non-violent sort of illegal markets if we’re to advocate or be agorists.

**II: Can Agora-Syndicalism and Libertarianism Get Along?**

Goodman makes some interesting comments about the tensions between syndicalism and libertarianism, “However, even unions that have syndicalist or alt-labor tendencies can engage in coercive tactics that undermine libertarian principles. … Syndicalism may also involve the coercive transfer of property, particularly when it entails seizing factories from their owners. … Agorist counter-economic action shifts incentive towards productive entrepreneurship and away from unproductive entrepreneurship. Syndicalist direct action may do this under some circumstances, particularly when it employs the innovative free-market model used by the Coalition of Immokalee Workers. But when syndicalist and illegalist direct action involves coercive transfer as a key tactic, it fuels an unproductive entrepreneurial process that can contribute to economic stagnation.”

For the sake of space, I’ll summarily respond to each point individually:

1. I wouldn’t dispute Goodman’s claim that alt-labor organizations can engage in coercive tactics but this seems like a minor quibble at best. *Any* labor organization or organization period can engage in coercive tactics but this doesn’t seem like a pitfall so much as an inherent possibility given human action. If Goodman could give us some reasons why this latent possibility in *any* organization is *particularly* worrisome from alt-labor organizations then perhaps I’d be more inclined to argue his point but as is, it doesn’t leave much to work with.

2. I agree with Goodman that syndicalism is done best when it is done peacefully and thus involving the state as little as possible. Much as I enjoy Rothbard’s *Confiscation and the Homestead Principle* where he calls for the seizure of capitalist property that relies on state subsidies to high degrees, implementation of this idea in peaceful ways would be difficult to say the least and likely bloody. I think his example of the Immokalee Workers is a great one and I would prefer to see more of that for many of the reasons Goodman rightly suggested as well as others.

There are other points to dispute or praise from Goodman but I think this suffices for now. I am hopeful that Glitterbomb or others may respond to Goodman about his challenges to agora-illegalism as I think they are also well put and worth considering.

## The Need For A Self-Aware, Intentional Agorist Movement: A Response to Nathan Goodman and Nick Ford
### Derrick Broze

Nathan Goodman does a great service by offering critiques to the Agorist, Illegalist, and Syndicalist framework. Where he succeeds in uncovering important questions for practitioners of these schools of thought, he may fail for lack of imagination or direct experience. As someone who identifies as an Agorist or Counter-Economist and practices the philosophy on a daily basis, my response to both Goodman and Ford is only interested in the sections of their essay’s associated with Agorism.

Briefly, Agorism is the philosophy that calls for the creation of counter-institutions to the state using a strategy of counter-economics to syphon political power and moral support away from the state. Samuel E. Konkin III, founder of Agorism, called for entrepreneurs to make use of the so-called black and grey markets. In the footnotes of Chapter 3 of *The New Libertarian Manifesto,* Konkin writes the following:

>“In short, the “black market” is anything non-violent prohibited by the State and carried on anyways. The “grey market” is used here to mean dealing in goods and services not themselves illegal but obtained or distributed in ways legislated against by The State. Much of what is called “white-collar crime” falls under this and is smiled upon by most of society.”

Nathan Goodman offers a critique of the use of the black market. Specifically Goodman compares prison gangs and their black market transactions with Agorism and asks what is an agorist to do about these unsavory situations?

>*“While these governance institutions lack the state’s monopoly jurisdiction and provide governance in a way that enables black market transactions, they can be just as authoritarian and violent as states.*
>
>*So prison gangs route around the state in order to facilitate and govern black markets. But they also engage in predatory violence, and they benefit from state policies. How should an agorist think about these institutions? Surely we should not valorize them as purely the agents of the counter-economic social change we want to see in the world.”*
>
>*“By working through the market process, agorist entrepreneurs have incentives to create value, access the dispersed knowledge that is coordinated through the price mechanism, and adapt their actions when they become destructive rather than productive. However, **black markets are distorted by the state in ways that often benefit particular participants in those black markets.** These actors may become predatory and embrace unproductive entrepreneurship that undermines liberty rather than advancing it.”*

This is an apparent blind spot in Nathan Goodman’s Agorist research. Namely, Konkin distinguished the peaceful black and grey markets of Agorism from violent market actions which he called “the red market”. As Nick Ford noted,

>*“In Samuel Edward Konkin III’s work he made the distinction between black markets and red markets and he explains this in his pamphlet Counter-Economics, “The Counter-Economy is the sum of all non-aggressive Human Action which is forbidden by the State. Counter-economics is the study of the Counter-Economy and its practices. The Counter-Economy includes the free market, the Black Market, the “underground economy,” all acts of civil and social disobedience, all acts of forbidden association (sexual, racial, cross-religious), and anything else the State, at any place or time, chooses to prohibit, control, regulate, tax, or tariff. The Counter-Economy excludes all State-approved action (the “White Market”) and the Red Market (violence and theft not approved by the State)”*

It seems obvious that educated Agorists would not support the violent actions of prison gangs or any other institution. Goodman goes on to ask what Agorist’s might do about counter-economic entrepreneurs who are incentivized to support state intervention in the interest of reducing competition. Goodman writes:

>*“In an agorist framework, bootleggers are understood as part of the black market, the counter-economy. Bootleggers provide goods that people have a natural right to purchase. They are entrepreneurs who route around the state to provide goods and services that have been unjustly criminalized. And yet because state intervention reduces the competition they face, these counter-economic entrepreneurs have incentives to support state intervention.”*

Nick Ford also handles this point,

>*“While Goodman is correct that from an agorist framework they would be considered a part of the black market, being a part of the black market and the counter-economy are not always the same thing. From my perspective a black market is simply a type of market whereby illegal goods are bought and sold. The counter-economy on the other hand is, I’d argue, a certain type of black market whereby the people involved are intentionally trying to mitigate the state’s efforts and do it for radical purposes.”*

I completely agree that there is a critical difference between the casual patron of the black and gray markets and a “conscious Agorist” or a practicing counter-economist. The average bootlegger or prison gang member may be participating in the black market, but cannot be thought of as a conscious agorist until an understanding of the philosophy has been achieved. Konkin understood this and made note of the importance of “consciousness-raising activity” and infecting the Statist economy with Agorist thought and action. Konkin writes:

>*“Now we can see clearly what is needed to create a libertarian society. On the one hand we need the education of the libertarian activists and the consciousness-raising of counter-economists to libertarian understanding and mutual supportiveness… Note well that libertarian activists who are not themselves full practicing counter-economists are unlikely to be convincing. ‘Libertarian’ political candidates undercut everything they say (of value) by what they are doing”*

The debate around ideology and intent is indeed one of growing importance as knowledge of the philosophy of Agorism expands thanks to the trend towards decentralized, peer-to-peer, digital tools. Nick Ford points out that Agorists (including Konkin) tout the Soviet Union’s black market as an example of the counter-economy in action, but often “much of the “counter-economy” had nothing at all to do with undermining state authority in any intentional or ideological way.” Eventually, Russians turned away from the black markets and joined the state-capitalist markets.

“What are agorists to make of this?,” Nick Ford asks. “For one thing I think they should temper their historical examples with more historical context but with that in mind it’s still true that black markets are a flexible and powerful tool for revolutionary struggle through peaceful means. But at the same time they are a strategy that can be co-opted like anything else. **If we have folks who are just bootleggers to make money or people who are doing things only to survive then the agorist revolution is unlikely to happen.**”

On this last point, Ford could not be more correct. As outlined by Konkin in the quote above, “consciousness-raising” is needed in order to secure an agorist revolution. In response to Ford’s request that agorists “tempter their historical examples with more historical context”, I would like to ever-so briefly provide an example of the counter-economy, and possible Agorist action, that I have not found referenced anywhere else. I am speaking of the “informal sector” of Peru during the 1980’s and 90’s. The informal sector was made up of individuals who operated outside government laws and regulations. The activities of the informal sector are conducted outside the legal system without regard to government regulations, including an informal economy.

In his 1989 book *The Other Path,* Hernando De Soto provides a detailed study of the emergence of the Peruvian informal economy, and how it operated. De Soto argued that government regulations on housing, transportation, and trade should be removed to allow the dynamics of the informal economy to take over. Unfortunately, De Soto and *The Other Path* seem to equate capitalism and the free market, going as far as promoting “market-oriented reforms” which will allow the informal economy to become the new statist economy. Rather than promoting total liberation through the use of the informal economy and a truly freed market, De Soto and his Institute for Liberty and Democracy believe that the capitalist system will liberate the people. Despite these shortcomings, *The Other Path* is recommended for the student of counter-economic activity.

One last important point on Peru’s informal economy is the fact that these black market entrepreneuers were investing and creating informal businesses as a direct attempt to escape the regulations of the state and the violence of the Maoist-terror group The Shining Path. When *The Other Path* was released it was designed to counteract the Marxist propaganda of The Shining Path, who had been teaching the peasant class that the market was something to despise rather than a tool for liberation. The book would become a best seller and help the growing informal economists recognize the power of unfettered trade and market action. Unfortunately, in the absence of a truly informed and organized Agorist movement, the informal economy seems to have been absorbed by the Peruvian Statist economy.

In the near future I plan to do a full-scale study on *The Other Path* examining the implications for the Agorist movement. For now, I hope the mention of Peru’s informal economy helps illustrate to Nick Ford that there are indeed examples of the power of the counter-economy. While the informal economy was without a doubt part of the black market as outlined by Konkin, it’s difficult to determine if the informal economy as a whole could be considered Agorist or counter-economic. De Soto does provide examples of individuals who recognized the value and power in removing their economic activity from the State’s thieving hands.

Now, if only we could elevate the consciousness of the larger Anarchist milieu and propel the Agorist revolution forward.


## Agora-Syndicalism and Illegalist Agorism: A Response to Nathan Goodman and Nick Ford
### Logan Marie Glitterbomb

While it is true that syndicalism and illegalism can diverge from and even sometimes butt heads with agorism, there seems to be much use in such alliances. It was within this spirit that Nathan Goodman offered critiques of each possible tactic and alliance and while some of the points speak for themselves, others require some fleshing out and questioning.

While it is noted that all labor unions, even alt labor organizations, can sometimes use coercive tactics, I agree with Nick Ford that such tactics are no more prevalent in the syndicalist movement than any other per se. That’s rather simply a pitfall of our species as a whole that we must work past as best as possible. But syndicalism is not just anti-authoritarian or alt labor, it is a tactic with an end goal: syndicalization of the means of production. When Nathan Goodman says that syndicalism can be compatible with agorism to an extent but the tactic of actual syndicalizing a workplace is not compatible or at least should not be encouraged, he is effectively saying that syndicalism is in fact not compatible with agorism at all.

“Syndicalism may also involve the coercive transfer of property, particularly when it entails seizing factories from their owners. There are worthwhile questions to ask about the legitimacy of existing property claims given historical injustices such as the enclosures and other state actions that have privileged capitalists and impoverished workers. However, action that serves to transfer property from one person (or group of persons) to another person or group without the consent of the initial owner is zero or negative sum action. Given that we have limited time, labor, resources, and entrepreneurial alertness, there is a real opportunity cost to devoting our efforts to securing transfers rather than production and mutually beneficial exchange.”

Syndicalism as a tactic involves using labor unions and alt labor organizations to challenge the boss’ power, improve work conditions and treatment, and eventually oust the boss, taking over the workplace as a worker’s syndicate and running it collectively. Without that last part, it just becomes plain old unionism though admittedly with a more anti-statist leaning. Syndicalism has as part of its philosophy a detailed critique of current capitalist property rights, agreeing with many left-libertarians that much of their property is the result of theft, coercion, enclosure, corporate subsidies, state licensing regimes, zoning laws, government bailouts, tax breaks, intellectual property laws, and other political favors, and therefore is illegitimate. And while, yes, if the original owner can be found, the property should revert back to their control and the decisions about what to do with it should rest with the original legitimate owner, as Rothbard and many others have pointed out, finding the original or “legitimate” owner can sometimes prove to be difficult or even impossible. It was in such a case that Rothbard claimed that the next best option was to turn such property over to those who have put the most labor into it recently, the workers. And while I can agree that working towards creating other forms of production and mutually beneficial exchange is a more productive way to go for the most part (I mean why syndicalize a McDonald’s instead of just starting a newer better restaurant collective that is more in line with anarchist values?), we have to remember that radical syndicalism is a tactic used mostly by the poorest on the economic ladder. These are the folks who are largely kept from participating as equal actors in the marketplace because of our rigged capitalist-state economy. Starting new business ventures, even on the black and grey markets, can involve either startup costs that are hard to afford or risks that some are unwilling to take. Unions and alt labor organizations offer a means of survival in an unfree market. Once the market is opened up to true competition, it will be much easier for someone to start a better business in an industry rather than being stuck trying to change an already existing business structure. Competition is a better tactic for eating the rich than directly taking over their property but as long as the market is rigged in their favor and they prevent true competition through the use of the state, syndicalism is a way to battle them within the confines of the skewed market they created and will hopefully aid in helping to truly free the market. I would even argue that while homesteading or syndicalizing already existing businesses isn’t as productive in terms of labor as is other forms of entrepreneurship, it can lead to more productive labor than before as traditional hierarchical businesses and corporations suffer much from knowledge problems as managers, CEOs, and other bosses rarely have the knowledge of what it actually takes to produce a product or perform a service that the rank and file workers who actually perform such tasks on a regular basis do. With workers actually in charge of their own work, they are able to do away with unnecessary and counter-productive corporate rules and regulations while also experimenting with new ways of doing things and new labor-saving technology in a way that actually benefits workers and increases production instead of threatening their jobs and financial security. All in all, collectives have the ability to run much more efficiently than top down businesses and as such can be far more productive business models.

Now as far as Nathan’s take on illegalism, it’s far too simplistic. He narrows the entire philosophy and set of tactics down to one small element of it: theft. But it should be noted that theft is only a very small part of illegalism and not all illegalists even participate in theft. As far as theft goes however, that was one of the tactics that fits more uneasily with agorism at best as pointed out in my original essay on the subject. While I generally see theft as antithetical to agorism, I do agree with the illegalist approach to theft as a tactic. Illegalists are not just willy nilly thieves who will just as soon rob a house or steal a personal car as they would rob a bank. Illegalists have ethics, much like agorists, that set them apart from your average criminal. Illegalists, when they do advocate theft, only advocate stealing from crony capitalists as a form of reappropriation. A consistent illegalist will not steal your purse or your car radio but will steal groceries from Wal-Mart. And while theft as a tactic might not be the most productive economically (the idea of attributing worth on the basis of economic productivity is questionable in itself but an altogether different topic), it is again a tactic of those most marginalized by the current unfree market. Theft, in illegalist terms, is a form of survival first and foremost. Don’t have food, go grab some off the grocery store shelf. No need to pay for it. Much as in the case of illegitimate property claims in our discussion of syndicalism, if a capitalist sells a product that is the result of worker exploitation and government favors, do they actually have legitimate claims on such products to begin with? Illegalism allows those shut out by the system to obtain the means for basic survival on the small scale. Larger scale actions like bank robbing and redistribution of the stolen wealth are noble and bold actions and are a way to challenge unjust rigged markets and illegitimate property claims but are extremely risky and, while proving to be immediately useful if successful, does nothing inherently to change the underlying system and only hopes to inspire others to eventually revolt which seems like a pipe dream at best. As a tactic, much like the illegalist tactic of revolutionary assassination, large scale reappropriation seems far less useful with the potential risks usually far outweighing the reward in terms of anarchist organizing. While I understand and even agree with the motives behind such actions when taken up for a revolutionary cause, I see them as far less useful and even useless at times as a means for long-term movement building and strategy. But illegalist tactics such as theft for survival, sabotage, counterfeiting, and black and grey market entrepreneurship (where illegalism and agorism meet) such as drug dealing, gun running, and sex work, are useful either as survival tactics in an unfree market or as ways to build a new world in the shell of the old while also working to slowly break the shell apart.


---
Fonte: 

* https://c4ss.org/content/45993

* https://c4ss.org/content/45997

* https://c4ss.org/content/45975

* https://c4ss.org/content/45985